Content(`nodejs loaders`) (#350)
AugustinMauroy/augustinmauroy.github.io: content/blog/how-to-test-react-app-with-node-test-runner.en.mdx

---
title: How to test a React app with Node Test Runner

> description: You ever wanted to test your React app with Node Test Runner? Here's how you can do it.

Reviewer: I might jazz this up with something like

```suggestion
description: Drastically simplify and speed up testing your React app by switching to Node Test Runner.
```

date: 2024-11-19
authors: AugustinMauroy
---

## Introduction

Testing is a crucial part of software development, ensuring that your application behaves as expected. With the [Node.js Test Runner](https://nodejs.org/en/learn/test-runner/introduction), you can seamlessly integrate testing into your [React](https://react.dev) application. This guide will walk you through the process of setting up and running tests for a React app using the Node.js Test Runner.

> > I really recommend you to read the [Node.js Test Runner documentation](https://nodejs.org/en/learn/test-runner/introduction) to understand how node.js test runner works.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> I really recommend you to read the [Node.js Test Runner guides](https://nodejs.org/en/learn/test-runner/introduction) to understand how node.js test runner works.
```

> This guide assumes you have a basic understanding of React and testing.

## Installing the Dependencies

First, you need to install the necessary dependencies. In addition to your React app dependencies, you will need the following:

```bash
npm install --save-dev @testing-library/react @testing-library/dom jsdom
```

> > **Note**: The rest of the dependencies we will use come from your runtime (Node.js).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note**: The rest of the dependencies we will use come from Node.js.
```

## Writing the Component to Be Tested

Let's create a simple React component that we will test. This component will be a counter that increments a value when a button is clicked.

```tsx fileName="src/components/Counter/index.tsx"
'use client';
import { useState } from 'react';
import styles from './index.module.css';
import type { FC } from 'react';

const Counter: FC = () => {
  const [count, setCount] = useState(0);

  return (
    <div className={styles.container}>
      <p className={styles.count}>{count}</p>
      <button onClick={() => setCount(count + 1)} className={styles.button}>
        Increment
      </button>
    </div>
  );
};

export default Counter;
```

<details>
  <summary>`index.module.css`</summary>

  ```css fileName="src/components/Counter/index.module.css"
  .container {
    @apply flex flex-col items-center justify-center;

    .count {
      @apply text-4xl;
    }

    .button {
      @apply px-4 py-2 bg-blue-500 text-white rounded-md;
    }
  }
  ```
</details>

## Registering Node.js Loaders

To handle TypeScript and CSS modules, you need to register the appropriate loaders. Create a file named `node-hooks/react-test.js` and add the following code:

> > If you want to understand what is a loader. You need to read [this post](/blog/post/how-to-use-nodejs-loader) I had written about loaders.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> To understand what is a loader, check out [this post](/blog/post/how-to-use-nodejs-loader).
```

```mjs fileName="node-hooks/react-test.js"
import { register } from 'node:module';
import { pathToFileURL } from 'node:url';
import jsdom from 'jsdom';

// Register the loaders

> register('nodejs-loaders/dev/tsx', pathToFileURL('./'));
> register('nodejs-loaders/testing/css-module', pathToFileURL('./'));

Reviewer: v2 will be published imminently, so I would just publish your article assuming v2

I think you don't need the 2nd argument for register here because they're node_modules

```suggestion
register('@nodejs-loaders/tsx');
register('@nodejs-loaders/css-module');
```

Author: I just tested on my blog and we need it

Reviewer: Hmm. Interesting

// We don't need to load any HTML/CSS because it's handled by testing-library
const { document } = new jsdom.JSDOM().window;

/**
 * Make the JSDOM global objects available to the Node.js environment.
 */
global.document = document;

> global.window = document.defaultView;

Reviewer: I think this will suffer some of the issues mention in https://nodejs.org/en/learn/test-runner/using-test-runner#user-interface-tests

Author: Humm I'll re-read

```

## Writing the Test

Now, let's write a test for the `Counter` component. Create a file named `index.test.tsx` in the same directory as your component:

```tsx fileName="src/components/Counter/index.test.tsx"
import assert from 'node:assert/strict';
import { describe, it } from 'node:test';
import { render, fireEvent, screen } from '@testing-library/react';
import Counter from './index.ts'; // ⚠️ We need to import the file with the .ts extension

describe('Counter', () => {
  it('should increment the count when the button is clicked', () => {
    const { unmount } = render(<Counter />);

    const button = screen.getByRole('button', { name: /increment/i });
    const count = screen.getByText('0');

    assert.strictEqual(count.textContent, '0');

    fireEvent.click(button);

    assert.strictEqual(count.textContent, '1');

>     // ⚠️ You must unmount the component instead the next test will still have the previous component in the "dom"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // ⚠️ It's a good idea to unmount the component to prevent it spilling over into the DOM of other tests
```

    unmount();
  });
});
```

### Structure of a Test File

A typical test file structure includes:

1. **Imports**: Import the necessary modules and components.
2. **Test Suite**: Define a test suite using `describe`.
3. **Test Case**: Define individual test cases using `it`.
4. **Render the Component**: Render the component to be tested.
5. **Perform Actions**: Simulate user interactions or other actions.
6. **Assertions**: Make assertions to verify the expected behavior.
7. **Unmount the Component**: Clean up by unmounting the component.

## Running the Test

To run the test, use the following command:

> ```bash

Reviewer: `.env` file?

Author: Hum ?

Author: Why ?

Reviewer: De-duplication, and makes the commands shorter

Author: so put `NODE_OPTIONS` in `.env` ? I'm having a sub-paragraph made that says “if you have too large an command”.

Author: Also there is no good resource yet at link for .env support
